ICR RSE: Improvements and Text Simplifications (#73)
RSE-Sheffield/pando-python: episodes/optimisation-data-structures-algorithms.md

The item to be appended is then copied to the end and the counter which tracks the list's length is incremented.

<!-- Based on ICR-RSE's visual note: https://icr-rse-group.github.io/carpentry-pando-python/optimisation-data-structures-algorithms.html#lists -->

> ![A visual diagram of list storage.](episodes/fig/list-append.png){alt="1. A list uses an array for storage, a continuous block of memory. (An array with 5 elements) 2. It can have additional storage, beyond its length. This makes appending fast. (an array with 7 elements, 2 unoccupied elements are marked '?', '7' is then appended leaving 1 unoccupied element marked '?' in a second array) 3. Appending to a full list, causes it to grow. This makes some appends slower. (An array with 7 occupied elements, '9' is appended, the second array has 9 elements with the final element marked '?') A list will typically grow by 12.5%, hence shorter lists will grow more frequently when appending." }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![A visual diagram of list storage.](episodes/fig/list-append.png){alt="1. A list uses an array for storage, a continuous block of memory. (An array with 5 elements) 2. It can have additional storage, beyond its length. This makes appending fast. (an array with 7 elements, 2 unoccupied elements are marked '?', '6' is then appended leaving 1 unoccupied element marked '?' in a second array) 3. Appending to a full list causes it to grow. This makes some appends slower. (An array with 7 occupied elements, '8' is appended, the second array has 9 elements with the final element marked '?') A list will typically grow by 12.5%, hence shorter lists will grow more frequently when appending." }
```
Also, we should probably change e.g. `6` to `pointer #6` if that works well in the updated figure.

Author: I've merged this suggestion, but the alt text feels very unweildy.

Would it better to just describe what the figure demonstrates verbaly? (e.g. this was generated by AI)

> A list uses a contiguous block of memory, similar to an array, for storing the pointers to its elements. It is depicted as a series of five adjacent boxes, each containing 'P' with a subscript from 1 to 5, representing pointers to the list's elements.
> 
> It can have additional storage, beyond its length. This makes appending fast. An illustration shows the previous list with two extra empty boxes marked with question marks, indicating spare elements. Below, Python code `len(my_list) == 5` and `my_list.append(6)` is shown. An arrow points to the list after appending, now showing 'P6' in the first of the previously empty boxes, and one remaining empty box. The length is now `len(my_list) == 6`.
> 
> Appending to a full list causes it to grow. This makes some appends slower. An illustration depicts a full list with 'P1' through 'P7' in adjacent boxes and a label &quot;No spare elements!&quot;. Below, Python code `len(my_list) == 7` and `my_list.append(8)` is shown. An arrow indicates the result: a new, larger contiguous block of memory with 'P1' through 'P8' followed by a question mark in an additional box, indicating one spare element. The label &quot;2 new elements&quot; with curved arrows suggests that when the list grows, it typically allocates more memory than just the space for the new element.
> 
> A concluding note states that a list will typically grow by 12.5%, hence shorter lists will grow more frequently when appending.

Reviewer: While longer, I find that easier to understand, yes. Just made a few tweaks of my own to shorten it:

> A list uses a contiguous block of memory, similar to an array, for storing the pointers to its elements. It is depicted as a series of five adjacent boxes, labelled 'P1' to 'P5', representing pointers to the list's elements.
>
> It can have additional storage beyond its length to make appends faster. An illustration shows the previous list with two extra empty boxes marked with question marks, indicating spare elements. Below, Python code `len(my_list) == 5` and `my_list.append(6)` is shown. After appending, the first of the previously empty boxes contains 'P6', and the last one remains empty. The length is now `len(my_list) == 6`.
>
> Appending to a full list causes it to grow. This makes some appends slower. An illustration depicts a full list with 'P1' through 'P7' in adjacent boxes and a label "No spare elements!". Below, Python code `len(my_list) == 7` and `my_list.append(8)` is shown. The result is a new, larger continuous block of memory with 'P1' through 'P8' followed by a question mark in an additional box, indicating one spare element. The label "2 new elements" with curved arrows suggests that when the list grows, it typically allocates more memory than just the space for the new element.
>
> A concluding note states that a list will typically grow by 12.5%, hence shorter lists will grow more frequently when appending.

Author: I suppose alt would be to just start each paragraph 1), 2) etc.

### Hashing Data Structures

Python's dictionaries are implemented as hashing data structures.
Explaining how these work will get a bit technical, so let's start with an analogy:

A Python list is like having a single long bookshelf. When you buy a new book (append a new element to the list), you place it at the far end of the shelf, right after all the previous books.

![A bookshelf corresponding to a Python list.](episodes/fig/bookshelf_list.jpg){alt="An image of a single long bookshelf, with a large number of books."}

A hashing data structure is more like a bookcase with several shelves, labelled by genre (sci-fi, romance, children's books, non-fiction,&nbsp;…) and author surname. When you buy a new book by Jules Verne, you might place it on the shelf labelled "Sci-Fi, V–Z".
And if you keep adding more books, at some point you'll move to a larger bookcase with more shelves (and thus more fine-grained sorting), to make sure you don't have too many books on a single shelf.

> ![A bookshelf corresponding to a Python dictionary.](episodes/fig/bookshelf_dict.jpg){alt="An image of two bookcases, labelled "Sci-Fi" and "Romance". Each bookcase contains shelves labelled in alphabetical order, with zero or few books on each shelf."}

Author: Yeah, I've normally swapped the outer quotes for single quotes in these occasions, clearly messed this one up.

> ![A bookshelf corresponding to a Python dictionary.](episodes/fig/bookshelf_dict.jpg){alt="An image of two bookcases, labelled "Sci-Fi" and "Romance". Each bookcase contains shelves labelled in alphabetical order, with zero or few books on each shelf."}

Author: Done a test build with single quotes and it outputs correctly.

The double quotes are automatically converted to `&quot;` (probably the real solution for nesting double quotes, I'd just forgot that html symbol existed (did remember `&nbsp;` above))
